Various studies have looked at the consequences of constant time delay in human-machine interaction in relevant domains as human-computer interaction, virtual environments, and teleoperation. Studies across a variety of computer tasks, from simple data entry to complex problem-solving tasks have shown that longer delays in system response times leads to higher frustration and stress, and decreased task performance [58,99,108]. Participants under conditions of long (8 s) system response times, as compared to those under short (2 s) system response times, showed lower error rates in performance. In physiological measurements, lower levels of systolic blood pressure were seen under long system response times, but a higher number of skin conductance reactions and pain symptoms (a headache, eye pain) were measured under short system response times [59]. In addition, lengthy system response times resulted in lower satisfaction and productivity among operators. Lower operator satisfaction may cause lower motivation to use current systems and drive operators to seek alternative devices. If there are no alternatives available to operators, they tend to adapt to the lags, but lower satisfaction can ultimately lead to lower productivity [50]. 

In teleoperation, work has focused on the effects of continuous and constant time delay on the performance and, to a lesser extent, workload. Early experiment showed that as continuous time delays increased, operators increasingly took a “move and wait strategy” to adapt to the continuous delays [36]. Performance degraded in a predictable way with factors of the length of the time delay, movement distance, and required accuracy. These results held for both simple and complex tasks. In both cases the subjects were able to maintain robot control stability. Buffering time delay solely in the video stream of telemanipulation has led to decreased accuracy in a mock welding task with a robot arm [85]. Moreover, a 3 s delay caused a 132% increase in a freeflight maneuver task compared to the task completion time of a free-flight without time delay [24]. Time delay lowered the human operators’ ability to recognize the environment through an unmanned ground vehicle, resulting in decreased task efficiency and observation sensitivity compared to when there was no time delay [70]. 

Early work in the interaction of constant time delay and task complexity indicated an additive relationship of the two variables to task performance, where there was no interaction [12]. Work in time delay and lag in virtual reality head-mounted displays showed no interaction between task complexity and time delays in performance or simulator sickness [82]. However, users have been shown to tolerate longer time delays and maintain task performance for complex tasks than for simple tasks [10,72,106]. This effect was seen for tasks where longer delays left more time for thinking work, allowing users to compensate and maintain performance [99,106]. The implications for telerobotic are unclear, as conflicting evidence about the interaction of time delay and task complexity appears to be very task dependent. To develop management techniques for time delays in teleoperation, a greater understanding of the relationship between task complexity and allowable time delay is needed [52].
